cdctl README

Last updated on Tue Apr 11 2000

Hi, thanks for trying out cdctl.  I hope you find it useful.  cdctl is a program
to control your cdrom drive under Linux, and hopefully many other UNIXes in the
future.  Right now, it does so much stuff that Í don't even bother maintaining
a list anymore.  Build it and do a 'cdctl --help' if you want the complete list
for your system.  I say "your system" because older Linux kernels can't do 
certain things.  cdctl detects this and doesn't build those features into
itself.

The parsing code for the play (-p or --play) option is really good.  I think I
have it completely bulletproofed, but if you can make cdctl segfault by feeding
it some crazy data, please let me know.  The code in get_tracks() can probably
be used as teaching material for looney manual string parsing in C.  I did a
very careful job to make it as readable as possible, even though it handles
just about every wierd exception I could think of.  Here are a some examples
of how to use it:

cdctl -p2         /* starts playing track 2 */
cdctl -p2:4       /* plays from track 2 through track 4 */
cdctl -p4:2       /* cdctl knows you mean "play 2 through 4" here */
cdctl -p:4        /* play from the first track through track 4 */
cdctl --play :4   /* with a long option */
cdctl --play=:4   /* same thing */
cdctl --play 4-12 /* dashes work too */
cdctl --play -13  /* play through track 13 */

Since cdctl does a straight ioctl(2) call to the drive, it should
automagically work as the kernel code is updated to deal with DVD drives. 
Jens Axboe, the Linux cdrom driver maintainer, has already confirmed that the
simple stuff like eject and toc reading on regular cds should work just fine,
since that cheapo ATAPI DVD drive you bought supports a subset of the regular
ATAPI calls.  Please let me know if your DVD drive does other stuff, or does
not do them.  My ATAPI DVD drives perform all functions successfully on my
test systems, so I'm pretty sure it should work well for you too.

Thanks to Beat Rupp <beat.rupp@gmx.net> for confirming that it works fine on
his ATAPI DVD drive, a Toshiba SD-M1212 DVD-ROM.  

I've also included a utility called sndreset that reads the current volume from
the CD mixer channel on your sound card, then writes the same value back.  This
seems pointless, but I need it to reset the volume on my Toshiba Satellite Pro's
sound card.  The #)(*$ APM BIOS forgets to reset the mixer volumes after I
suspend the laptop, so every time I wake it up, I DON'T GET ANY SOUND!  It was
very annoying to fire up the mixer every time I woke the laptop up, so I ended
up doing an strace(8) on aumix, and found out that it reads the volume and
writes it right back to the mixer using ioctl(SOUND_MIXER_WRITE_X).  I wrote a
silly little utility to do just that, and now it's part of cdctl.  

I've also included a perl version of sndreset, because I only recently found out
that perl had an ioctl() call.  My perl doesn't have ioctls.ph installed
correctly, so I can't test it.  Do a ./sndreset.pl and see if it works on your
system.

The -u (automount) option causes the cdrom to automatically close the cdrom
tray when a mount command is received, and to automatically eject the cdrom
tray when the cd is unmounted.  Some people were confused about this.  By
default, the Linux kernel only closes the cdrom tray when a mount command is
received, and does not automatically eject a cdrom on unmount; setting this
flag causes it to exhibit both behaviours.     

If you're the paranoid type, you can verify that this REALLY IS cdctl and
not some nefarious subversion of the open source development system by
importing my public key, getting the digital signature of the tarball at 
http://cdctl.sourceforge.net/cdctl-latest.tar.gz.sig, and verifying the digital
signature matches up with my key.  You can get my public key from the file
PUBLICKEY in this distribution, by fingering thalakan@host30.frys.com, or from
pgpkeys.mit.edu.  This should be a simple as

gpg --import PUBLICKEY; cd ..; gpg --verify cdctl-latest.tar.gz.sig
cdctl-latest.tar.gz

if you're using gpg.  I'm just beginning to crypto to sign my code, so let me
know if I'm doing it correctly.   Also feel free to encrypt any mail you want to
send me if you have a crypto fetish.  

If you have your cdrom on a wierd device file besides "/dev/cdrom", you can use
the CDROM environment variable to select which cdrom you want to use.
Something like 'alias eject-cdrom-2="CDROM=/dev/scd1;cdctl --eject"' should be
what you're looking for if you want to eject your second cdrom drive.  Thanks
to Thomas Soares <ttsoares@cedep.ifch.ufrgs.br> for making me add this to the
docs.

You can also say "cdctl --eject /dev/scd1" now.  Thanks to Thomas again for
making me implement this.  

I debated for a while on how to get cdctl to cope with the different kernel
versions.  Making it run on the kernel it was compiled under is easy; whether
to allow that version to run on other kernels is the question.  I decided to
not allow compilation of features that don't exist in your kernel, and to
have cdctl tell you that your kernel doesn't support certain features, should
you try to run a version compiled on a kernel later than the one you have.  

Speed selection (cdctl -b6) doesn't seem to do much on most drives.  However,
if you have one of those 36x or faster drives, setting this to a lower value is
rumored to stop that helicopter sound it makes when it spins the disc up.  You
lose a little bit of speed, but your computer doesn't slide across the table
when you mount a disc... some of the newer 50x and faster drives are reported
to be really fscking loud, shaking screws out of the case and things like
that.  My main client, Fry's Electronics, is currently carrying 72x drives that
have a theoretical maximum data transfer rate of 10.8MB/sec, but in practice,
it's much lower.  However, those drives apparently do spin the disc up to the
speed necessary to get that transfer rate, so you'll find the -b option very
useful for them.  

cdctl responds to the "DEBUG" environment variable, like all the software I
write.  When cdctl sees that DEBUG has been set, it will print out all sorts of
interesting debugging information.  Try setting it if you are having problems. 

You can reach me at thalakan@technologist.com if you have any questions,
patches, or pizza.
